MON-2853: add alert "TargetDown" (#137)
openshift/runbooks: alerts/cluster-monitoring-operator/TargetDown.md

> # TargetDown

Author: absolutely, will add a link when this runbook is published :)

## Meaning

The alert means that Prometheus fails to scrape some targets.

> It fires when at least 10% of scrape targets in a Service are unreachable (`up`

Author: specific numbers are removed 👍

metric = 0) for at least 15 minutes.

## Impact

> Metrics from the offline targets are not scraped by Prometheus. By consequence,

Reviewer: according to its description
```
        - alert: TargetDown
          annotations:
            description: '{{ printf "%.4g" $value }}% of the {{ $labels.job }}/{{ $labels.service
              }} targets in {{ $labels.namespace }} namespace have been unreachable for
              more than 15 minutes. This may be a symptom of network connectivity issues,
              down nodes, or failures within these components. Assess the health of the
              infrastructure and nodes running these targets and then contact support.
```
change `up metric = 0` to `up job = 0` is better

> Metrics from the offline targets are not scraped by Prometheus. By consequence,

Author: `up` is a metric having a label `job`, do you mean we should mention `job` label here?

we lose the visibility into the health and performance of the monitored application
represented by the target.

The alerts may lose accuracy or even become crippled if the missing metrics play
a role in the triggering condition of the alert. Critical alerts may not fire
when they should, potentially leading to unnoticed service disruption.

Auto-scalers may not work properly if the missing metrics are critical to scaling
conditions. This leads to potential degradation in user experience or waste of
valuable resources.

## Diagnosis & Mitigation

The `TargetDown` alert indicates that one or more scrape targets are not responding
to Prometheus scrape query.

The alert has labels `namespace`, `service` and `job`. With these labels we can
identify which Prometheus instance fails to scrape which target.

> In the Openshift web console, go to the tab **Observe** -> **Metrics**.  Check

Reviewer: ```suggestion
In the OpenShift web console, go to the tab **Observe** -> **Metrics**.  Check
```

the metric `up` with these labels to find the down targets are in which pods.
Here is an example query:
```text

> up{namespace="openshift-monitoring", service="thanos-querier", job="thanos-querier"} == 0

Reviewer: check the alert TargetDown details from "Observe -> Alerting" directly, would know which target is down

> up{namespace="openshift-monitoring", service="thanos-querier", job="thanos-querier"} == 0

Reviewer: > maybe we should just ask to run `up == 0` to get all the down targets (to avoid copy/paste this)

FYI, if set `up == 0` only, there are too many labels, see picture for `up == 1`
![Screenshot from 2023-09-19 13-30-09](https://github.com/juzhao/test/assets/22743651/8b7d5d4c-fa70-4861-9532-ae18f236f9c7)

> up{namespace="openshift-monitoring", service="thanos-querier", job="thanos-querier"} == 0

Reviewer 2: in some cases we may want to debug no-longer firing `TargetDown` alerts, I don't know if "Observe -> Alerting" keeps a history of them.

I was just looking for a way to get all the targets that are down without having the user deal with labels and to get a general view of targets being down as this may help establishing correlations.

```

Then check the label `prometheus` and `pod` in the returned metric `up`.

> The label `prometheus` should be either `openshift-monitoring/k8s` or `openshift-user-workload-monitoring/user-workload`,

Reviewer 2: I don't see any `TargetDown` alert being triggered, this is just from the targets view.

if I'm missing sth, where do we define the alert for UWM?

> The label `prometheus` should be either `openshift-monitoring/k8s` or `openshift-user-workload-monitoring/user-workload`,

Reviewer: TargetDown alert is not fired for down targets under user project, filed one bug: https://issues.redhat.com/browse/OCPBUGS-19826

indicating the Prometheus pods scraping the target are either `prometheus-k8s-0`

> / `prometheus-k8s-0` in the namespace `openshift-monitoring`, or `prometheus-user-workload-0`

Reviewer: ```suggestion
/ `prometheus-k8s-1` in the namespace `openshift-monitoring`, or `prometheus-user-workload-0`
```

/ `prometheus-user-workload-1` in the namespace `openshift-user-workload-monitoring`.
The label `pod` indicates the pod exposing the metrics endpoint.

> The targets are defined in either `ServiceMonitor` or `PodMonitor` resources.

Reviewer 2: we can also ask them to take a look at the ` Metrics targets` page, sometimes the error messages them may help and sometimes the ServiceMonitor/PodMonitor exposes multiple targets (from different containers, same contain but different ports, or same port and different paths...) and checking the state of all the targets may help guide the debugging: if for example only one target out of 3 is down, it's probably not prometheus fault etc.

Reviewer 3: :100: I'd rather point users to the Targets page because it should contain the reason why Prometheus can't scrape the target(s).

The labels `namespace` and `service` that help us locate the `Service` exposing
the metric endpoint.
The label `namespace` and `job` can locate the `ServiceMonitor` or `PodMonitor` that
configures Prometheus to scrape the target. The `job` label is the name of the monitor.

Now we have both end of the metric scraping flow as well as the monitor resources
linking them together.
We are ready to diagnosing the root cause by inspecting each component on the scraping
workflow.

### Network Issues

> Check the network connectivity between the Prometheus pod and the target pod.

Reviewer 2: The `net_conntrack_dialer_conn_xxx_total` metrics exposed by Prometheus could be really helpful here

`net_conntrack_dialer_conn_failed_total` for example give the reason of conn failure: `timeout`. `resolution`, `refused` etc.

Reviewer 2: I suggest we only ask to troubleshoot if `net_conntrack_dialer_conn_failed_total` says so.

Ensure that the target pod is reachable from the Prometheus pod and that there are
no firewall rules or network interruptions blocking communication.

Please refer to [Troubleshooting network issues](https://docs.openshift.com/container-platform/4.13/support/troubleshooting/troubleshooting-network-issues.html)

> in Openshift document for more details.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
in the Openshift document for more details.
```

### Target Resource Exhaustion

> Check if the target pod resource utilization is too high, causing it to become unresponsive.

Reviewer 2: I'd start by asking to make sure that the metrics are available locally first:

after checking the pod/container is healthy and running (check its logs, events, ) we can:

on the container that exposes the metric, curl its localhost:port/metrics or whatever couple of times and see if the metrics are returned.

Reviewer 2: if metrics are not return then it's an application problem that needs to be debugged (add/enable debug logs, check existing logs, check if any `Rate Limiting or Throttling` (we can merge with that section here) ).

Author: will merge the section Rate Limiting or Throttling here

> To view usage of CPU and memory, we can check these metrics:

Reviewer 2: we can just refer to an already existing dashboard, it'll be easier.

the dashboard can help detect any consumption explosion when manually  curling localhost:port/metrics

Author: will add a phrase lettign user to check dashboard

  * `container_memory_working_set_bytes` Total memory in use. This includes all
  memory regardless of when it was accessed.
  * `container_memory_failcnt` Cumulative count of memory allocation failures.
- File System Usage
  * `container_fs_reads_bytes_total` and `container_fs_writes_bytes_total`
  Cumulative filesystem read and write operations in bytes.
  * `container_fs_reads_total` and `container_fs_writes_total` Cumulative
  filesystem read and write operations in bytes.
  * `kubelet_volume_stats_available_bytes` The free space in a volume in bytes.

If some basic metrics are not available, we can also use this command to get
 CPU and memory usage of a pod:
```bash
oc top pod $POD_NAME
```
As well as this command for volume free space:
```bash
oc exec -n $NAMESPACE $POD_NAME -- df
```

### Target Application or Service Failure

Investigate if the application or service running on the target is experiencing
issues or has even crashed. Review logs and last metrics from the target pod to
identify any errors or crashes.

Here is [a guide to investigate pod issues](https://docs.openshift.com/container-platform/4.13/support/troubleshooting/investigating-pod-issues.html)

> in Openshift.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
in OpenShift.
```

### Incorrect Target Configuration

Verify that the scrape target configuration in Prometheus is correct. This
configuration is generated from the `ServiceMonitor` and `PodMonitors`.
We can get the `ServiceMonitor` and `PodMonitors` related to the alert with this
command using the `namespace` and `job` label:
```bash
oc get servicemonitor -n $NAMESPACE -o yaml $JOB
```
Check the target's port, selector, scheme, TLS settings, etc for invalid values.
Please refer to [the Prometheus Operator API document](https://github.com/prometheus-operator/prometheus-operator/blob/main/Documentation/api.md)
for detailed specification of `ServiceMonitor` and `PodMonitors`.

About the TLS settings, even if the values are correct, it may still fail due to
certificate expiration. Please refer to the next section for details.

> ### Expired SSL/TLS Certificates

Author: I will add a phrase telling user to contact openshift support when automatic renewal does not happen. but keep the steps to force a renewal in the runbook in case the user want an immediate resolution of the issue.

    scheme: https
    tlsConfig:
      ca: {}
      caFile: /etc/prometheus/configmaps/serving-certs-ca-bundle/service-ca.crt
      cert: {}
      certFile: /etc/prometheus/secrets/metrics-client-certs/tls.crt
      keyFile: /etc/prometheus/secrets/metrics-client-certs/tls.key
      serverName: node-exporter.openshift-monitoring.svc
  jobLabel: app.kubernetes.io/name
  namespaceSelector: {}
  selector:
    matchLabels:
      app.kubernetes.io/component: exporter
      app.kubernetes.io/name: node-exporter
      app.kubernetes.io/part-of: openshift-monitoring
```
In the `Prometheus` that scrapes this target, the volume mounted at `/etc/prometheus/secrets/*`
are the secrets having the same name as the subdirectory. In this example, the secret
is `metrics-client-certs` in the namespace `openshift-monitoring`. Now we extract
the certificate from the secret using this command:
```bash
oc extract secret/$SECRET_NAME -n $NAMESPACE --keys=tls.crt --to=- > certificate.crt
```
Then we inspect is expiration date.
```bash
openssl x509 -noout -enddate -in certificate.crt
```
The output should contain `notAfter` field as its expiration date.
```bash
notAfter=Aug  6 13:11:20 2025 GMT
```

> Normally Openshift can automatically renew the certificates before expiration date.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Normally OpenShift can automatically renew the certificates before expiration date.
```

```bash
oc get secret $SECRET_NAME -n $NAMESPACE -o yaml &> secret-tls.yaml
```
2. Delete the secret holding the certificate.
```bash
oc delete secret $SECRET_NAME -n $NAMESPACE
```
3. Check the newly created secret contains a valid certificate.
```bash
oc get secret $SECRET_NAME -n $NAMESPACE -o yaml
```
It should return certificate content with expiration date.
```bash
apiVersion: v1
data:
  tls.crt: ....
  tls.key: ....
kind: Secret
metadata:
  annotations:
    service.alpha.openshift.io/expiry: "2025-08-06T13:11:20Z"     <<< Here is the expiration date.
    service.beta.openshift.io/expiry: "2025-08-06T13:11:20Z"
    service.beta.openshift.io/originating-service-name: prometheus-k8s
    service.beta.openshift.io/originating-service-uid: a781e552-b3c3-4b74-b068-1d7152671b72
  name: prometheus-k8s-tls
  namespace: openshift-monitoring
  ownerReferences:
  - apiVersion: v1
    kind: Service
    name: prometheus-k8s
type: kubernetes.io/tls
```
4. Restart the pods using this certificate by deleting the pods.
```bash
# by name
oc delete pod $POD_NAME -n $NAMESPACE
# or by label
oc delete pod -l $LABEL_SELECTOR -n $NAMESPACE
```

> ### Prometheus Scraping Interval

Author: will mention this in new version.

Ensure that the scraping interval for the target is appropriately configured.
Too frequent scraping can degrade the performance of target pod, even causing
timeout when scraping.

Pay close attention to the metric `scrape_duration_seconds`. If scrape duration
is close to the scrape interval, we may consider to increase the interval.

> ### Target Metrics Path

Reviewer 2: I'd talk about this in `Incorrect Target Configuration`

Verify that the metrics path in the target is correctly defined in `ServiceMonitor`
and `PodMonitor`. If due to recent update the target changes the metrics path, the
metric endpoint should update accordingly.

> ### Target Restart or Update

Reviewer 2: we can ask to check this before running `its localhost:port/metrics` locally in the container. (see above)

If the target was recently restarted or updated without replications, it might
temporarily become unavailable. Check if this is the case and allow some time for
it to stabilize.

### Node Failures

Check if the node where the target is running has experienced failures or evictions.
Please refer to [this guide](https://docs.openshift.com/container-platform/4.13/support/troubleshooting/verifying-node-health.html)
on verifying node health.

> ### Rate Limiting or Throttling

Reviewer 2: (suggested to move this, see above)

To diagnose potential issues with automatic certificate renewal, perform the
following checks:
1. Ensure the `prometheus-k8s` stateful set logs do not display errors related to
   certificates.
   ```bash
   oc logs statefulset/prometheus-k8s -n openshift-monitoring
   ```
2. Verify that the scraped target pod(s) logs are free from certificate-related errors.
3. Check that the `cluster-monitoring-operator` pod is running and its logs contain
   no errors regarding certificate rotation.
   ```bash
   oc logs deployment/cluster-monitoring-operator -n openshift-monitoring
   ```
4. Confirm the `prometheus-operator` pod is operational and its logs have no errors
   concerning certificate rotation.
   ```bash
   oc logs deployment/prometheus-operator -n openshift-monitoring
   ```

#### Prometheus Scraping Interval

Ensure that the scraping interval for the target is appropriately configured.
Too frequent scraping can degrade the performance of target pod, even causing
timeout when scraping.

The last scrape duration is visible on the **Observe** -> **Targets** tab in the
Openshift web Console.

Otherwise we can check the metric `scrape_duration_seconds`.

> If scrape duration is close to the scrape interval, we may consider to increase
> the interval.
> 
> The scrape interval is configured in the `ServiceMonitor` or `PodMonitor`.

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
If scrape duration is close to the scrape interval, consider increasing
the interval, which is configured in the `ServiceMonitor` or `PodMonitor` resource.
```

> #### Target Metrics Path

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
#### Target metrics path
```

> Verify that the metrics path in the target is correctly defined in `ServiceMonitor`
> and `PodMonitor`. If due to recent update the target changes the metrics path, the
> metric endpoint should update accordingly.

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
Verify that the metrics path in the target is correctly defined in the `ServiceMonitor`
and `PodMonitor` resources. If due to recent update the target changes the metrics path, the
metric endpoint should update accordingly.
```
The last sentence's meaning isn't clear - "due to recent update" of what?

Author: here I want to say the scraped target may receive a code update that changes the metrics/ endpoint.

> #### Target Restart or Update

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
#### Target restart or update
```

If the target was recently restarted or updated without replications, it might
temporarily become unavailable. Check if this is the case and allow some time for
it to stabilize.

> #### Node Failures

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
#### Node failures
```

Check if the node where the target is running has experienced failures or evictions.

> Please refer to [Verifying Node Health](https://docs.openshift.com/container-platform/4.13/support/troubleshooting/verifying-node-health.html).

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
See [Verifying Node Health](https://docs.openshift.com/container-platform/4.13/support/troubleshooting/verifying-node-health.html) for more information.
```

# TargetDown

This runbook provides guidance for diagnosing and resolving the `TargetDown`` alert
in OpenShift Container Platform.

## Meaning

> The `TargetDown`` alert fires when Prometheus has been unable to scrape one

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The `TargetDown` alert fires when Prometheus has been unable to scrape one
```

  * `container_fs_reads_total` and `container_fs_writes_total` Cumulative
  filesystem read and write operations in bytes.
  * `kubelet_volume_stats_available_bytes` The free space in a volume in bytes.

If some basic metrics are not available, we can also use this command to get
 CPU and memory usage of a pod:
```bash
oc top pod $POD_NAME
```
As well as this command for volume free space:
```bash
oc exec -n $NAMESPACE $POD_NAME -- df
```

#### Target Application or Service Failure

Investigate if the application or service running on the target is experiencing
issues or has even crashed. Review logs and last metrics from the target pod to
identify any errors or crashes.

Here is [a guide to investigate pod issues](https://docs.openshift.com/container-platform/4.13/support/troubleshooting/investigating-pod-issues.html)
in OpenShift.

#### Incorrect Target Configuration

Verify that the scrape target configuration in Prometheus is correct. This
configuration is generated from the `ServiceMonitor` and `PodMonitors`.
We can get the `ServiceMonitor` and `PodMonitors` related to the alert with this
command using the `namespace` and `job` label:
```bash

> oc get servicemonitor -n $NAMESPACE -o yaml $JOB

Reviewer: seems the command is wrong, maybe should
`oc get servicemonitor  $SERVICEMONITOR -n $NAMESPACE -o yaml`

Author: will add explaination of the relation between `job` and ServiceMonitor name:
```The name of `ServiceMonitor` is the `job` name unless the property `jobLabel` is set in `ServiceMonitor`.```

      keyFile: /etc/prometheus/secrets/metrics-client-certs/tls.key
      serverName: node-exporter.openshift-monitoring.svc
  jobLabel: app.kubernetes.io/name
  namespaceSelector: {}
  selector:
    matchLabels:
      app.kubernetes.io/component: exporter
      app.kubernetes.io/name: node-exporter
      app.kubernetes.io/part-of: openshift-monitoring
```
In the `Prometheus` that scrapes this target, the volume mounted at `/etc/prometheus/secrets/*`
are the secrets having the same name as the subdirectory. In this example, the secret
is `metrics-client-certs` in the namespace `openshift-monitoring`. Now we extract
the certificate from the secret using this command:
```bash
oc extract secret/$SECRET_NAME -n $NAMESPACE --keys=tls.crt --to=- > certificate.crt
```
Then we inspect is expiration date.
```bash
openssl x509 -noout -enddate -in certificate.crt
```
The output should contain `notAfter` field as its expiration date.
```bash
notAfter=Aug  6 13:11:20 2025 GMT
```

Normally OpenShift **automatically renews** the certificates before expiration date.
This date should be sometime in the future. If the certificate does expire without

> automatic renewal, please contact OpenShift support team.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
automatic renewal, please contact the OpenShift support team.
```

If the issue requires immediate resolution, please refer to [this guide on how to

> force a certificate renewal](https://access.redhat.com/solutions/5899121).

Reviewer: it links to 3.11 KB, do we have 4.x KB?

Author: Though it is marked for  version 3.11. It works for 4.x, too. 

---------This is the content I used to put here --------------------
However, we can force to renew it manually if we need immediate resolution:
  1. Create a backup of the secret which contains the certificate.
```bash
oc get secret $SECRET_NAME -n $NAMESPACE -o yaml &> secret-tls.yaml
```
  2. Delete the secret holding the certificate.
```bash
oc delete secret $SECRET_NAME -n $NAMESPACE
```
  3. Check the newly created secret contains a valid certificate.
```bash
oc get secret $SECRET_NAME -n $NAMESPACE -o yaml
```
It should return certificate content with expiration date.
```bash
apiVersion: v1
data:
  tls.crt: ....
  tls.key: ....
kind: Secret
metadata:
  annotations:
    service.alpha.openshift.io/expiry: "2025-08-06T13:11:20Z"     <<< Here is the expiration date.
    service.beta.openshift.io/expiry: "2025-08-06T13:11:20Z"
    service.beta.openshift.io/originating-service-name: prometheus-k8s
    service.beta.openshift.io/originating-service-uid: a781e552-b3c3-4b74-b068-1d7152671b72
  name: prometheus-k8s-tls
  namespace: openshift-monitoring
  ownerReferences:
  - apiVersion: v1
    kind: Service
    name: prometheus-k8s
type: kubernetes.io/tls
```
  4. Restart the pods using this certificate by deleting the pods.
```bash
# by name
oc delete pod $POD_NAME -n $NAMESPACE
# or by label
oc delete pod -l $LABEL_SELECTOR -n $NAMESPACE
```

To diagnose potential issues with automatic certificate renewal, perform the
following checks:
1. Ensure the `prometheus-k8s` stateful set logs do not display errors related to
   certificates.
   ```bash
   oc logs statefulset/prometheus-k8s -n openshift-monitoring
   ```
2. Verify that the scraped target pod(s) logs are free from certificate-related errors.
3. Check that the `cluster-monitoring-operator` pod is running and its logs contain
   no errors regarding certificate rotation.
   ```bash
   oc logs deployment/cluster-monitoring-operator -n openshift-monitoring
   ```
4. Confirm the `prometheus-operator` pod is operational and its logs have no errors
   concerning certificate rotation.
   ```bash
   oc logs deployment/prometheus-operator -n openshift-monitoring
   ```

#### Prometheus Scraping Interval

Ensure that the scraping interval for the target is appropriately configured.
Too frequent scraping can degrade the performance of target pod, even causing
timeout when scraping.

> The last scrape duration is visible on the **Observe** -> **Targets** tab in the

Reviewer: see picture
![scrape](https://github.com/juzhao/test/assets/22743651/b872068a-b982-4640-bc4e-a88b9469bf20)
it is the time of last scrape, not duration

> Openshift web Console.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
OpenShift web Console.
```

Otherwise we can check the metric `scrape_duration_seconds`.

If scrape duration is close to the scrape interval, we may consider to increase
the interval.

The scrape interval is configured in the `ServiceMonitor` or `PodMonitor`.

#### Target metrics path

Verify that the metrics path in the target is correctly defined in the `ServiceMonitor`
and `PodMonitor` resources. If the scraped target pod changes its metrics path in
recent code update, the metric endpoint should update accordingly.

#### Target restart or update

If the target was recently restarted or updated without replications, it might
temporarily become unavailable. Check if this is the case and allow some time for

> it to stabilize.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
it stabilizes.
```

provides more details.

#### Target Resource Exhaustion

Check if the pod's healthy and ready probes reports good state.
Then check whether the metric endpoint is responsive.
We can either forward the metric port to local and then query it using use `curl`,
 `wget` or similar tools. Or on the container exposing the metric, send
query to the port serving the metric endpoint.

If query returns an error, it is probably an application problem.
If the query takes too long or times out, it is probably due to resource exhaustion.

Some applications may enforce rate limiting or throttling. Check if the scraping
traffic is hitting such limits, causing the target to become temporarily unavailable.
Checking the pod's logs and events may help us diagnose such problems.

Then we should check if the target pod resource utilization is too high, causing
it to become unresponsive.
We can refer to the tab **Observe** -> **Dashboards** in the Openshift web Console
to have an overview of resource utilization. The Dashboard `Kubernetes/Compute Resources/Pod`

> can show the CPU, memory, network and storage usage of the pod.

Reviewer: `Kubernetes / Compute Resources / Pod` dashboard

issues or has even crashed. Review logs and last metrics from the target pod to
identify any errors or crashes.

Here is [a guide to investigate pod issues](https://docs.openshift.com/container-platform/4.13/support/troubleshooting/investigating-pod-issues.html)
in OpenShift.

#### Incorrect Target Configuration

Verify that the scrape target configuration in Prometheus is correct. This
configuration is generated from the `ServiceMonitor` and `PodMonitors`.
We can get the `ServiceMonitor` and `PodMonitors` related to the alert with this
command using the `namespace` and `job` label:
```bash
oc get servicemonitor -n $NAMESPACE -o yaml $JOB
```
Check the target's port, selector, scheme, TLS settings, etc for invalid values.
Please refer to [the Prometheus Operator API document](https://github.com/prometheus-operator/prometheus-operator/blob/main/Documentation/api.md)
for detailed specification of `ServiceMonitor` and `PodMonitors`.

About the TLS settings, even if the values are correct, it may still fail due to
certificate expiration. Please refer to the next section for details.

#### Expired SSL/TLS Certificates

> If the target uses SSL/TLS for communication, check if the SSL/TLS certificate
> has expired or certificate files accessible by Prometheus.

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
If the target uses SSL/TLS for communication, check if the SSL/TLS certificate
has expired or if Prometheus can access the certificate files.
```

> The certificate used by Prometheus to scrape metrics endpoint is indicated in the
> `.spec.endpoints.tlsConfig.certFile` property of a `ServiceMonitor` or `PodMonitor`.
> The path of the certificate file points to a mounted volume on the Prometheus Pod.
> Therefore we can deduce which secret holds the certificate.

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
The certificate used by Prometheus to scrape a metrics endpoint is specified in the
`.spec.endpoints.tlsConfig.certFile` property of a `ServiceMonitor` or `PodMonitor` resource.
The path of the certificate file points to a mounted volume in the Prometheus pod.
You can use this information to deduce which `Secret` object holds the certificate.
```

> Here is an example.
> We have a `ServiceMonitor` using `/etc/prometheus/secrets/metrics-client-certs/tls.crt`
> as its certificate file.

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
The following example shows a `ServiceMonitor` resource using `/etc/prometheus/secrets/metrics-client-certs/tls.crt`
as its certificate file.
```

    app.kubernetes.io/name: node-exporter
    app.kubernetes.io/part-of: openshift-monitoring
    app.kubernetes.io/version: 1.5.0
    monitoring.openshift.io/collection-profile: full
  name: node-exporter
  namespace: openshift-monitoring
spec:
  endpoints:
  - bearerTokenSecret:
      key: ""
    interval: 15s
    port: https
    relabelings:
    - action: replace
      regex: (.*)
      replacement: $1
      sourceLabels:
      - __meta_kubernetes_pod_node_name
      targetLabel: instance
    scheme: https
    tlsConfig:
      ca: {}
      caFile: /etc/prometheus/configmaps/serving-certs-ca-bundle/service-ca.crt
      cert: {}
      certFile: /etc/prometheus/secrets/metrics-client-certs/tls.crt
      keyFile: /etc/prometheus/secrets/metrics-client-certs/tls.key
      serverName: node-exporter.openshift-monitoring.svc
  jobLabel: app.kubernetes.io/name
  namespaceSelector: {}
  selector:
    matchLabels:
      app.kubernetes.io/component: exporter
      app.kubernetes.io/name: node-exporter
      app.kubernetes.io/part-of: openshift-monitoring
```
In the `Prometheus` that scrapes this target, the volume mounted at `/etc/prometheus/secrets/*`

> are the secrets having the same name as the subdirectory. In this example, the secret
> is `metrics-client-certs` in the namespace `openshift-monitoring`. Now we extract
> the certificate from the secret using this command:

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
holds the secrets that have the same name as the subdirectory. In this example, the secret
name is `metrics-client-certs` located in the `openshift-monitoring` namespaces. Now you can extract
the certificate from the secret by using the following command:
```

```bash
oc extract secret/$SECRET_NAME -n $NAMESPACE --keys=tls.crt --to=- > certificate.crt
```

> Then we inspect is expiration date.

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
After you extract the certificate, you can inspect its expiration date by running the following command:
```

```bash
openssl x509 -noout -enddate -in certificate.crt
```
The output should contain `notAfter` field as its expiration date.
```bash
notAfter=Aug  6 13:11:20 2025 GMT
```

Normally OpenShift can automatically renew the certificates before expiration date.
if the certificate does expire without automatic renewal, please contact OpenShift
support.

> However, we can force to renew it manually if we need immediate resolution:

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
Normally, OpenShift automatically renews certificates before they expire.
If a certificate does not renew automatically and expires, please contact
Red Hat Support.
However, you can also manually force the certificate to renew if you need immediate resolution:
```

> 1. Create a backup of the secret which contains the certificate.

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
1. Create a backup of the secret which contains the certificate:
```

```bash
oc get secret $SECRET_NAME -n $NAMESPACE -o yaml &> secret-tls.yaml
```

> 2. Delete the secret holding the certificate.

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
2. Delete the secret that contains the certificate:
```

```bash
oc delete secret $SECRET_NAME -n $NAMESPACE
```

> 3. Check the newly created secret contains a valid certificate.

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
3. Check that the newly created secret contains a valid certificate:
```

```bash
oc get secret $SECRET_NAME -n $NAMESPACE -o yaml
```

> It should return certificate content with expiration date.

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
This command should return the content of the certificate, including the expiration date, as shown in the following example:
```

```bash
apiVersion: v1
data:
  tls.crt: ....
  tls.key: ....
kind: Secret
metadata:
  annotations:
    service.alpha.openshift.io/expiry: "2025-08-06T13:11:20Z"     <<< Here is the expiration date.
    service.beta.openshift.io/expiry: "2025-08-06T13:11:20Z"
    service.beta.openshift.io/originating-service-name: prometheus-k8s
    service.beta.openshift.io/originating-service-uid: a781e552-b3c3-4b74-b068-1d7152671b72
  name: prometheus-k8s-tls
  namespace: openshift-monitoring
  ownerReferences:
  - apiVersion: v1
    kind: Service
    name: prometheus-k8s
type: kubernetes.io/tls
```

> 4. Restart the pods using this certificate by deleting the pods.

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
4. Delete the pods using this certificate by restarting them:
```

```bash
# by name
oc delete pod $POD_NAME -n $NAMESPACE
# or by label
oc delete pod -l $LABEL_SELECTOR -n $NAMESPACE
```

> #### Prometheus Scraping Interval

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
#### Prometheus scrape interval
```

> Ensure that the scraping interval for the target is appropriately configured.
> Too frequent scraping can degrade the performance of target pod, even causing
> timeout when scraping.

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
Ensure that the scrape interval for the target is appropriately configured.
If scraping occurs too frequently, it can degrade the performance of a target pod, and even cause
timeouts when scraping.
```

> The last scrape duration is visible on the **Observe** -> **Targets** tab in the
> Openshift web Console.
> 
> Otherwise we can check the metric `scrape_duration_seconds`.

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
The last scrape duration is visible on the **Observe** -> **Targets** tab in the
Openshift web Console. Alternatively, you can check the `scrape_duration_seconds` metric.
```
